Litereum: the minimal secure decentralized computer
===================================================

In 2013, the first generalized transaction ledger, Ethereum, was proposed,
extending Bitcoin with a stateful scripting language that allowed complex
transactions to be taken without third parties. Ethereum users can play on
cassinos, trade on exchanges, bet on prediction markets, leave heritages and
more, without middle men. Due to continuous protocol improvements to make it
more powerful, scalable, faster and less energy hungry, Ethereum has became big
and complex. This has resulted in developer centralization, and increased the
surface for security flaws.

Litereum is a simplified version of Ethereum that trades features, scalability
and speed for absolute simplicity, security and decentralization. Its design is
final and will never require updates, eliminating developer centralization. Its
implementation is simple and can be easily replicated. Its scripting language is
a small calculus that is prone to formal verification, reducing the odds of
software errors, and making it inherently secure. Its signature algorithm relies
on hash functions, making it resistant to quantum attacks. It uses Proof of Work
as its consensus algorithm, since it is simple to implement and has established
security. It has no pre-mined tokens. Its hash algorithm is an EVM primitive,
allowing a bridge between both blockchains to be launched, and users to move
tokens between the networks.

Litereum doesn't bring any particular innovation. Instead, it merely combines
stablished technologies to provide a neutral, decentralized, secure settlement
environment that is ideal for transactions that demand security over cost,
ultimately increasing the use cases and security of the Ethereum ecosystem.

Design
------

Implementation
--------------
